---
title: Insert title here
key: fd584745630a81464b32f14cdb33909e

---
## Summarizing the Program Need

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "49450c6a88"
```

`@lower_third`

name: Zachary Drake
title: Security Data Scientist


`@script`
Wow! So far you have found a real problem that our program might be able to address. We also determined the target group that is most at risk. However, finding these things is not enough on its own. In the last part of this lesson, we are going to summarize the differences between our target group and comparison groups and create a visualization that will be easy for program leadership to understand.


---
## Creating a Comparison Group

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "497e89a5cd"
hide_title: false
```

`@part1`
How is the target group different? {{1}}
- Age {{2}}
- Sex {{3}}
- Education {{4}}
- Geography{{5}}
- Behaviors {{6}}
- Opinions {{7}}
- Many more! {{8}}


`@script`
A good program evaluation doesn't just identify or confirm the target of the program. The evaluation also must analyze and consider the differences between the target groups and the non-target groups in a population. Essentially we are asking the question: "How is our target group different?". {{1}} 

There might be many ways our target group might be different from our comparison groups. Some common differences to consider are Age {{2}}, Sex {{3}}, Education {{4}}, and Geography {{5}}. However with many programs you might also need to consider the differences in Behaviors {{6}} or maybe even Opinions {{7}}. This list is in no way exhaustive. As a data scientist you will need to think carefully about what which group differences are important for your study.


---
## Summarizing Group Differences

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "757b199dca"
```

`@part1`
_Basic_: 
Females vs Males
_Better_:
Low Wage Middle Aged Females
Middle Wage Middle Aged Females
High Wage Middle Aged Females
Low Wage Middle Aged Females


`@script`
When reporting an evaluation,you need to summarize the differences between groups as concisely as possible.This will usually mean creating informative names for each group. For instance, if your target group is "females", then logically your comparison group might be “males". However a target group can be more complex, for instance all females, ages 30 to 55, with an income below $15,000 per year. In this case, it is better to name this group something like “Low Wage Middle Aged Females”. The comparison groups might be be "Middle Wage Middle Aged Females", "High Wage Middle Aged Females", "Low Wage Middle Aged Females" and so on.


---
## Summarizing Group Differences in R

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "4814cffb2c"
hide_title: true
```

`@part1`
```
groupDifferences <- data %>%
	group_by(sex, age, income) %>%
	summarise_all(mean) %>%
	mutate(name = paste(sex, age, income)) %>%
	mutate(target = if_else(sex == "female" & 
    	income == 'low' & 
    	age == 'young', TRUE, FALSE)) %>%
    ungroup() %>%
	select(name, education_years, incidents_reported,
		opinion_of_program, number_of_reports, target)
print(groupDifferences)                 
```


`@script`
Summarizing the differences between groups can be done very easily in R. We can use the "group_by" verb in the "dplyr" package to group observations. The we can use the "summarise" function to calculate the mean of each column for each group.

Here we have some code to do just this. We are creating a new R data frame called "groupDifferences". We pipe our evaluation data into the "group_by" verb and group on our three comparison variables: sex, age, and income. Then we pipe this data into the "summarise_all" verb and pass the mean function to it. We also add a quick mutate line that adds a column that is TRUE on our target group. Finally we print the new data frame to the console so we can see our summary.


---
## Visualizing Group Differences in R

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "0c9590b025"
```

`@part1`
```
plotDifferences <- ggplot(groupDifferences, 
	aes(x = name, y = incidents_reported)) + 
	geom_bar(stat = "identity", aes(fill = target)) + 
    scale_fill_manual(values=c("dark grey", "blue")) +
	coord_flip() + 
	guides(fill = FALSE) 
print(plotDifferences)                  
```


`@script`
The best way to report the summary of differences is with a visualization. In longer, more in-depth evaluations, you will need to make multiple visualizations to show multiple summaries. Here we have some code to create a bar chart that shows the average number of incidents for each group. We will save this plot to a new R object called "plotDifferences". We pipe the data frame we made on the last slide into the "ggplot" function. We add the incidents variable as an aesthetic on the x axis. We then add a the bar geometry with a color aesthetic on the target identifier we made with the mutate function. This plot makes it very easy to see that our target group has many more incidents on average.


---
## Let's practice!

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "c036190e32"
```

`@script`
Now you have an understanding of how to report the between group differences in your data. It's time practice on the data you have been working with so far. Good luck!

